Welcome to Empire 4, codenamed Wolfpack.  Congratulations on your choice!

See the "LEGAL", "LICENSE", "CREDITS" and "README" files for all the
related information and legal notices. It is expected that any future
projects/authors will amend these files as needed.

For questions and comments, please contact "wolfpack@wolfpackempire.com".

If you want to build the server, follow the few simple steps below.  If
you are looking for more information on the files here, options for
the server, etc. take a look in the "doc" directory, then follow the steps
below to build and start the server.

(1) Unpacking the server
  To unpack the server, simply gunzip and untar the source.

(2) Building a server
  Note that you may not have to build a server.  If you received the
  server in binary format, go to the next step, "Creating the world."

  To build the server, you need to do the following steps:
FIXME needs work

  1) Get a copy of the source.  Since you're reading this, we assume
     you have done that. 
  2) Gunzip the source.  Again, since you're reading this . . . ;-)
  3) Run configure.
  4) Run make.

(3) Creating the world
  (NOTE: If you received a binary, you must edit the included data/econfig
   file to represent the paths where your data and info directories are.)
  1) First, pick the world size you want to use.  Once you have chosen
     a world size, edit the "data/econfig" file (it was either created
     at build time, or shipped with the binary) and change the WORLD_X
     and WORLD_Y to be the sizes you want. The default world size is 64x32.
     IMPORTANT: WORLD_X *MUST* be divisible by 2.  In addition, if you
     change the world size later, you *MUST* re-create the world by
     running "bin/files" again.
  2) Go into the "bin" directory, and run "./files".
  3) If you want to create a new world, run "./fairland 10 30" to create
     a sample world (read the documentation for fairland for more info on
     it's arguments.)
  Note that "files" and "fairland" use the world size in the econfig file
  if it exists in the data directory.  If this file doesn't exist, and you
  don't specify one, it will use the default world size the server was
  compiled with (Wolfpack binaries ship with a 64x32 world size)  You can
  create an econfig file with default values using the "bin/pconfig"
  executable.

(4) Running the server
  1) Run the bin/emp_server executable to start the server.

That's it.  Once running, you can log on to the server using the emp_client
program found in the "bin" directory.  The initial deity country name/password
is POGO/peter.

If you get a "You're not a deity!" message and logged off, check the
"data/server.log" file and look at the end for a "NON-AUTH" entry.
There should be a "user@host" message in there that failed to log in.
Enter this user and host in the auth file, and you should be able to
log into the server as a deity now.

For more information on options, programs, files and other general hints
look in the "doc" directory.  The README there describes the files there and
what they talk about.

For more information or help, send e-mail to "wolfpack@wolfpackempire.com" and
we'll try to answer if we can.  Also check out our web site at
"http://www.wolfpackempire.com"

Have fun!

 -- The Wolfpack development team...
