Why backups
-----------

Running a game without regular backups is irresponsible.  A bug, a
system crash or a deity error can destroy the game, leaving you no way
to recover except restoring from backup.  If you foolishly neglected
to make regular, working backups, players, who likely invested
substantial time in your game, will have every reason to be very angry
with you.


Manual backups
--------------

The recommended way to make a backup is to shut down the server, copy
the complete data directory, then restart the server.

Having to shut down the server for backups is inconvenient, and we're
working on better solutions.

Copying the data directory while the server runs is *unsafe*: the copy
may be inconsistent, because files may change during copying.
However, it works more often than not, and is much better than making
no backups.


Automatic backups
-----------------

The server lets you run an arbitrary command right before the update,
with players locked out.  You can use this feature to make a back up
on each update automatically.

The command runs in the data directory.  stdin, stdout, stderr are
redirected to /dev/null.  Beware: if it exits unsuccessfully, the
update is cancelled!  An example backup script can be found in
scripts/backup.

You define the command in econfig, like this:

  pre_update_hook "/wherever/backup"


Restoring from backup
---------------------

The server must not be running when you restore a backup.

Always restore the complete data directory.  Restoring individual
files from backups can lead to inconsistencies.  Some of the known
problems with partial restores are:

 * In games with MOB_ACCESS enabled, mobility will be extremely out of
   sync.

 * Land units, ships and planes may think they are loaded onto ships
   or land units that do not exist, or have changed owner (been sunk
   or destroyed and then rebuilt) since the last backup.

Testing backups
---------------

Backups are worthless unless you verify restoring works.  Using the
real game to verify causes down time.  It's smarter to have a second
game, inaccessible to the public, running the same server program.  If
it runs on the same machine, it has to use a different port, and that
means a different econfig file.  Make sure not to clobber it when you
restore a backup from the real game.
