To install mapper, edit makempeg and mapper and
(1) fix paths
(2) change names of countries to exclude
(3) add a crontab similar to the one in the file crontab.config

When starting, type:
make clean
make color.ppm

-children

   This directory contains a number of scripts which output PPM format
files suitable for conversion to gif with the PBM utilities or MPEG
with mpeg_encode.  mpeg_encode is available from
	http://s2k-ftp.cs.berkeley.edu:8000/multimedia/mpeg/
PBMPLUS is available from 
	ftp://ftp.ee.lbl.gov/
Some of the scripts (mapper in particular) depend on a country
"mapper" being defined that can be logged into automatically using the
Empire client eif.  Modify to use the client and country name of your
choice.

-harmless



pgmmap.awk
   A simple map making program.  Reads a deity dump file and produces
a grayscale .pgm file as output, with each color corresponding to a
country number.  To make a color coded map, scramble the colors.

pgmfallout.awk
   Convert a deity census file into a PGM file with fallout levels.

randppm.awk
   Generates random colors in a ppm file.  Useful for remmapping colors
from pgmmap.awk

over.awk
   Reads in a report file and generates a text overlay of country names.
Requires pbmtext (part of netpbm) to work.

param.pl
   Modify an mpeg parameter file to use map-*.gif files as input.
Reads the highest level file from the file 'frames' and skips over any
file not 300-500 bytes long (in a 64x32 blitz, the .gif files should
be ~400 bytes).  Larger worlds may require different size limits.
Disabling the size limits is not advised, as this is the only way
corrupt frames are eliminated.

makempeg
   Log into the mapper country, capture new report files, and generate
a new .mpg file.  Also copies map.mpg and final.gif into the web space
directories so others can view them.  The web copy may be commented
out or modified to meet your local needs.

mapper
   Log into mapper country and capture a map of the current owners of
the world (.gif format).  Games without fallout should comment out the
fallmap producing line.

archive.pl
   Pushes the archived blitz records down the stack (in web space) and
prints out a new .html index.

-Drake (dld@chem.psu.edu)
